# Reading Assignment 14b

## Google's Conclusion to the Perfect Team

---

A person named Julia Rozovsky after bouncing between a few jobs trying to look for the one that fit, eventually decided to apply to business school and got accepted to Yale. When they arrived there they were assigned a study group in the hopes of building bonds and these groups had become a sort of rite of passage in M.B.A programs as a way for students to have practice working in teams was a reflection of the increasing demand from employers who want people who can work in and navigate team dynamics well.<br>

In this group, Rozovsky would meet between classes or after dinner to do things like discuss homework, compare business spreadsheets and collectivly strategize for exams. Everyone there was smart and had a lot in common even down to the type of college they attended and in theory these similarities would make it easy for the group to work together, but Rozovsky noticed that their group was full of stressful situations as people jockeyed for social position always trying to justify their intelligence and pushing others down to lift themselves higher. This source of stress caused Rozovsky to search out alternate groups to be in and they found a group of people creating a team for "case competitions" where they would collaborate to come up with soloutions to real-world problems that would be evaluated by judges for the hopes of a trophy or cash prize. And they found that due to the nature of the differing backgrounds of the people in the team everyone had a different expertise and no one tried to push themselves above others and they would often email dumb jokes to one-another and spend time just talking for some of the meetings. And their study group fell apart in the second semester while the team stayed together for the entire two years they were at Yale.<br>

Now, companies have always been searching for the best way to figure out the best way to make employees better at their job and faster and with the advent of advancing technology, it has become even easier to gather a large mass of data to examine. And in about 2011 or so, Google became focused on reaserching how to build the perfect team and spent millions of dollar examining and evaluating every aspect of the employee life that they could, and they drew some patterns like the most productive employees having a larger network by dining with different people and the best managers communicate well and don't micromanage(suprisingly was news to some people). Then in 2012, Google launched Project Aristotle, a mass study of hundreds of teams to figure out the reasons why they either suceed or fail. This is where Rozovsky comes back into the story. After graduating from Yale, they were hired by Google and were assigned to the project.<br>

At first, the reearchers gathered together the collective studies and conclusions of the previous century of research into this topic and tried to arrange a pattern from it. They did not suceed. No matter how the arranged or examined the data, they couldn't find a pattern. Some of the groups were composed of people who were friends outside of work, others strangers outside of a conference room. Some wanted a strong manager, others perferred a less structured hierarchy. And they also found that teams of near identical makeup could vary wildly in level of effectiveness.<br>

However, they did find one semi-consitent pattern. Some of the studies they read referred to a "group norm" or a tradition or unwritten rule of the group that they agree upon like avoiding disagreement is more productive than debating. Once they found this pattern, they examined the data they had gathered from their own research looking for norms. They honed in on times that an employee mentioned an unwritten rule or a behavior that is part of the team culture. For example, one that had teammates inturrupting each other and managers encouraging it by doing it themselves or the oppisete happens, where teammates talk one at a time and any interruption is frowned upon and discouraged when ocurring. Some celebrated birthdays and talked in meeting informally; and some only talked business discouraged gossiping. The list goes on.<br>

After a year of examining these hundreds of teams, they reached a conclusion that understanding these group norms was the key to solving the issue, but they needed to determine which norms to encourage and which to discourage. Of the ones they found, there were dozens that seemed effective, but the norms of one team might contrast with another wildly but both teams being equally successful. So the team behind the project had to decide which were the most common norms among sucessful teams.<br>

Now, to take a side road for a minute to examine a similar study done in 2008 by M.I.T and Union College. They recruited 699 people, divided them into groups and gave each one a list of task to perform that required varying types of cooperation. As they examined the sucess rate of these tasks they did observe a pattern that if a team did well on one of the tasks, they were likely to do well on the others. And the oppisiote was also true, a team that failed at one typically failed at them all. When examining the behaviors though is where the divide came back. The teams that succeeded were often behaving in very different ways. But, they did notice two behaviors that were mostly consistent.<br>

First, the team members all talked in equal time and measure, whether that was everyone having something to say at each task or each person having one task they took charge of, each person had talked equally by the end.<br>
Second, the team members had a "high social sensitivity" which is just an overly fancy way of saying that people could use their intuition to determine how the other people felt through non-verbal cues.<br>

Now, back to Project Aristotle. When the team used this pattern for the data, they found it held up well. That this idea of "academic safety" or the ability to feel safe to take risks and speak your mind when needed and feel like you are an equal part of the team. However, the team knew that implementing this wouldn't be easy as you can tell people to take turns during conversation and be sensitive to the feelings of your teammates all you want, but the kind of people who become software engineers at Google didn't exactly take the job because they wanted to talk about their feelings.<br>

When they did test cases to try and implement this idea, there were some sucesses and ultimately they reached a potential method of reaching "psycological safety" by encouraging teams to have emotional conversations as the unwritten rules of conversation when attenmpting to bond with people were similar to the ones they were trying to implement.<br>

Overall, the study revealed the unwritten knowledge that good managers knew and already used but it opened the door to it being an aknowledged practice with more widespread usage and we can only hope that the findings of the study will actually be used by more companies rather than relying on the old, control based method that most companies seem to relient on and are unlikely to change soon.